Add "Writing a custom Behat formatter" cookbook (#149)
Behat/docs: cookbooks/custom_formatter.rst

Reviewer: It's a really good addition. The only changes I'd request would be to replace "behat" with "Behat" and try and stay away from terms like "simple" when trying to explain a step. It's not a hard ask but something that's simple to a lot of people might not be simple for others.

Writing a custom Behat formatter
================================

> How to write a custom formatter for Behat ?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
How to write a custom formatter for Behat?
```

Introdution
-----------

> Why a custom formatter ?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Why a custom formatter?
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Behat has three native formatters:

> -  **pretty**: the default formatter, that does print every line in green (in case of a successful test) or red (if it does fail),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-  **pretty**: the default formatter, which prints every line in green (if a test passes) or red (if it fails),
```

-  **progress**: print a "dot" for each test, and a recap of all failing tests at the end,
-  **junit**: outputs a `junit <https://junit.org/>`__ compatible XML file.

Those are nice, and worked for most of the cases. You can use the "progress" one for the CI, and the "pretty" for development for example.

But you might want to handle differently the output that Behat renders. 

> In that cookbook, we will see how to implement a custom formatter for `reviewdog <https://github.com/reviewdog/reviewdog>`__, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this cookbook, we will see how to implement a custom formatter for `reviewdog <https://github.com/reviewdog/reviewdog>`__, 
```

-  any stdin, coupled with an "errorformat" (a Vim inspired format that can convert text string to machine-readable errors),
-  a `"Reviewdog Diagnostic Format" <https://github.com/reviewdog/reviewdog/tree/48b25a0aafb8494e751387e16f729faee9522c46/proto/rdf>`__: a JSON with error data that reviewdog can parse.

In my case, I tried parsing behat's output with errorformat, but I do not know this language, and the multi-line behat output with "dots" didn't make it simple.
So I decided to create a custom formatter for Behat.

This way, I will still have behat's human-readable stdout, and a JSON file written that reviewdog can understand.

Let's dive
----------

Behat allows us to load "extensions", that can add features to the language. In fact, it is a core functionnality to implement PHP functions behind gherkin texts.
Those extensions are simple classes, that are loaded in Behat.

Behat is powered by Symfony: if you know it, you will already know the concepts under the hood, if you don't, that's not a problem and not required to create your extension.

Anatomy of a formatter extension
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A formatter extension requires three things to work:

> -  a class that "defines" the extension, to make you extension work with behat,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-  a class that "defines" the extension, to make your extension work with behat,
```

-  a "formatter", that can listen to behat events, and converts behat's tests result to anything you want,

> -  an "output printer", that does write the converted data anywhere you want (mainly the stdout, a file or a directory).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-  an "output printer", that writes the converted data anywhere you want (mainly the stdout, a file or a directory).
```

Create the extension
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Any behat extensions must implements ``Behat\Testwork\ServiceContainer\Extension``. Under the hood, it does implements Symfony ``CompilerPass``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Any behat extensions must implement ``Behat\Testwork\ServiceContainer\Extension``. Under the hood, it implements Symfony ``CompilerPass``.
```

It is a way to inject anything you want into Behat's kernel.

It our case, we need to load the "formatter" in behat's kernel, and tagged it as an output formatter.

> This way behat will allows our extension to be configured as a formatter. You can register multiple formatters with the same extension if you like.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In our case, we need to load the "formatter" in behat's kernel, and tag it as an output formatter.
This way behat will allow our extension to be configured as a formatter. You can register multiple formatters with the same extension if you like.
```

.. code:: php

   <?php

   declare(strict_types=1);

   namespace JDeniau\BehatReviewdogFormatter;

   use Behat\Testwork\Output\ServiceContainer\OutputExtension;
   use Behat\Testwork\ServiceContainer\Extension;
   use Behat\Testwork\ServiceContainer\ExtensionManager;
   use Symfony\Component\Config\Definition\Builder\ArrayNodeDefinition;
   use Symfony\Component\DependencyInjection\ContainerBuilder;

   class ReviewdogFormatterExtension implements Extension
   {
       public function getConfigKey()
       {
           return 'reviewdog_formatter';
       }

       /**
        * This is the only method that we will configure to inject our formatter
        */
       public function load(ContainerBuilder $container, array $config): void
       {
           // register the "Output printer" class
           $outputPrinterDefinition = $container->register(ReviewdogOutputPrinter::class);

>            // add some arguments. In that case, it will use behat's current working directory to write the output file, if not override 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
           // add some arguments. In this case, it will use behat's current working directory to write the output file, if not override 
```

           $outputPrinterDefinition->addArgument('%paths.base%');

           // register the "ReviewdogFormatter" class in behat's kernel
           $formatterDefinition = $container->register(ReviewdogFormatter::class);
           
           // add some arguments that will be called in the constructor. 

>            // That's not required but in my case I inject behats base path, to remove it from the absolute file path later, and the printer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
           // This isn't required, but in my case I inject behat's base path (to remove it from the absolute file path later) and the printer.
```

           $formatterDefinition->addArgument('%paths.base%');
           $formatterDefinition->addArgument($outputPrinterDefinition);

>            // tag the formatter as an "output.formatter", this way behat will add it to it's formatter list.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
           // tag the formatter as an "output.formatter", this way behat will add it to its formatter list.
```

        * We will see that later in the "integration".
        * In our case, the only allowed parameter is a "file_name" that must be a string : the JSON file that we will write.
        */
       public function setParameter($name, $value): void
       {
           switch ($name) {
               case 'file_name':
                   if (!is_string($value)) {
                       throw new \InvalidArgumentException('file_name must be a string');
                   }

                   $this->outputPrinter->setFileName($value);
                   break;
               default:
                   throw new \Exception('Unknown parameter ' . $name);
           }
       }

       /**
        * I do not call this, so no need to define an implementation
        */
       public function getParameter($name) { }

       /**
        * Our formatter is a Symfony EventSubscriber. 
        * This method tells behat where we want to "hook" in the process.
        * Here we want to be called:
        *   - at start, when the test is launched with the `BeforeExerciseCompleted::BEFORE` event,
        *   - when a step has ended with the `StepTested::AFTER` event.
        * 

>         * There is a lot of other that can be found here: https://github.com/Behat/Behat/tree/2a3832d9cb853a794af3a576f9e524ae460f3340/src/Behat/Testwork/EventDispatcher/Event

Reviewer 2: I suggest not linking here - just to make sure people go and look for the most recent version in case the events change in future.

```suggestion
        * There are a lot of other events that can be found here in the Behat\Testwork\EventDispatcher\Event class
```

       public function getName(): string
       {
           return 'reviewdog';
       }

       public function getDescription(): string
       {
           return 'Reviewdog formatter';
       }

       public function getOutputPrinter(): OutputPrinter
       {
           return $this->outputPrinter;
       }

       /**
        * When we launch a test, let's inform the printer that we want a fresh new file
        */
       public function onBeforeExercise(BeforeExerciseCompleted $event):void
       {
           $this->outputPrinter->removeOldFile();
       }

       public function onAfterStepTested(AfterStepTested $event):void
       {
           $testResult = $event->getTestResult();
           $step = $event->getStep();

           // In the reviewdog formatter, we just want to print errors, so ignore all steps that are not a failure executed test
           // but you might want to handle things differently here !
           if ($testResult->isPassed() || !$testResult instanceof ExecutedStepResult) {
               return;
           }

           // get the relative path
           $path = str_replace($this->pathsBase . '/', '', $event->getFeature()->getFile() ?? '');

>            // do prepare the data that we will send to the printer…

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
           // prepare the data that we will send to the printer…
```

           $line = [
               'message' => $testResult->getException()?->getMessage() ?? 'Failed step',
               'location' => [
                   'path' => $path,
                   'range' => [
                       'start' => [
                           'line' => $step->getLine(),
                           'column' => 0,
                       ],
                   ],
               ],
               'severity' => 'ERROR',
               'source' => [
                   'name' => 'behat',
               ],
           ];

           $json = json_encode($line, \JSON_THROW_ON_ERROR);

           // …and send it
           $this->getOutputPrinter()->writeln($json);
       }

   }

Create the output printer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The latest file that we need to implement is the printer. In you case it's a simple class that can write lines to a file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The last file that we need to implement is the printer. In our case it's a simple class that can write lines to a file.
```

.. code:: php

   <?php

   namespace JDeniau\BehatReviewdogFormatter;

   use Behat\Testwork\Output\Printer\OutputPrinter;

   class ReviewdogOutputPrinter implements OutputPrinter
   {
       private ?bool $isOutputDecorated;

       /** the outputPath where we will write the output file */
       private ?string $outputPath = null;

       /** The default filename, if none is provided */
       private string $fileName = 'reviewdog-behat.json';

       public function __construct(private readonly string $pathBase) { }

       /**
        * as the formatter can inform us of the filename, we need to store that
        */
       public function setFileName(string $fileName): void
       {
           $this->fileName = $fileName;
       }

       /**

>         * outputPath is a special parameter that you can give to behat formatter under th key `output_path`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        * outputPath is a special parameter that you can give to any behat formatter under the key `output_path`
```

        */
       public function setOutputPath($path): void
       {
           $this->outputPath = $path;
       }

       /**
        * The output path, defaults to behat's base path
        */
       public function getOutputPath(): string
       {
           return $this->outputPath ?? $this->pathBase;
       }

       /** Sets output styles. */
       public function setOutputStyles(array $styles): void { }

       /** @deprecated */
       public function getOutputStyles()
       {
           return [];
       }

       /** Forces output to be decorated. */
       public function setOutputDecorated($decorated): void
       {
           $this->isOutputDecorated = (bool) $decorated;
       }

       /** @deprecated */
       public function isOutputDecorated()
       {
           return $this->isOutputDecorated;
       }

       /**

>         * Behat can have mutliple verbosity level, you may want to handle it to display more informations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        * Behat can have mutliple verbosity levels, you may want to handle this to display more information.
        * These use the Symfony\Component\Console\Output\OutputInterface::VERBOSITY_ constants.
```

        * For reviewdog, I do not need that.
        */
       public function setOutputVerbosity($level): void { }

       /** @deprecated */
       public function getOutputVerbosity()
       {
           return 0;
       }

       /**
        * Writes message(s) to output stream.
        * 
        * @param string|array<string> $messages
        */
       public function write($messages): void
       {
           if (!is_array($messages)) {
               $messages = [$messages];
           }

           $this->doWrite($messages, false);
       }

       /**
        * Writes newlined message(s) to output stream.
        * 
        * @param string|array<string> $messages
        */
        
       public function writeln($messages = ''): void
       {
           if (!is_array($messages)) {
               $messages = [$messages];
           }

           $this->doWrite($messages, true);
       }

       /**
        * Clear output stream, so on next write formatter will need to init (create) it again.
        * Not needed in my case.
        */
       public function flush(): void
       {
       }

       /**

>         * Called by the formatted when test starts

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        * Called by the formatter when test starts
```

        */
       public function removeOldFile(): void
       {
           $filePath = $this->getFilePath();

           if (file_exists($filePath)) {
               unlink($filePath);
           }
       }

       /**
        * @param array<string> $messages
        */
       private function doWrite(array $messages, bool $append): void
       {
           // create the output path if if does not exists.
           if (!is_dir($this->getOutputPath())) {
               mkdir($this->getOutputPath(), 0777, true);
           }

           // write data to the file
           file_put_contents($this->getFilePath(), implode("\n", $messages) . "\n", $append ? \FILE_APPEND : 0);
       }

       private function getFilePath(): string
       {
           return $this->getOutputPath() . '/' . $this->fileName;
       }
   }

Integration in your project
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> You need to add the extension in you behat configuration file (default is ``behat.yml``) and configure it to use the formatter:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You need to add the extension in your behat configuration file (default is ``behat.yml``) and configure it to use the formatter:
```

.. code:: yaml

   default:
     extensions:
       JDeniau\BehatReviewdogFormatter\ReviewdogFormatterExtension: ~
       
     formatters:
       pretty: true
       reviewdog: # "reviewdog" here is the "name" given in our formatter

>          # output_path is optional and handled directy by behat

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
         # output_path is optional and handled directly by behat
```

         output_path: 'build/logs/behat'
         # file_name is optional and a custom parameter that we inject into the printer
         file_name: 'reviewdog-behat.json'

Different output per profile
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> You can active the extension only for a certain profile by specifying a profile in your command (ex: ``--profile=ci``)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can activate the extension only for a certain profile by specifying a profile in your command (ex: ``--profile=ci``)
```

> For example if you want the pretty formatter by default, but both progress and reviewdog on your CI, you can configure it like that:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example if you want the pretty formatter by default, but both progress and reviewdog on your CI, you can configure it like this:
```

.. code:: yaml

   default:
     extensions:
       JDeniau\BehatReviewdogFormatter\ReviewdogFormatterExtension: ~
       
     formatters:
       pretty: true

   ci:
     formatters:
       pretty: false
       progress: true
       reviewdog:
         output_path: 'build/logs/behat'
         file_name: 'reviewdog-behat.json'

> Enjoy !

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enjoy!
```

-------

> That's how you can write a simple custom behat formatter !

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That's how you can write a simple custom behat formatter!
```

> If you have much more complex logic, and you need to formatter to be more dynamic, behat do provide a FormatterFactory interface.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have much more complex logic, and you need the formatter to be more dynamic, Behat do provide a FormatterFactory interface.
```

You can see usage examples directly in `behat's codebase <https://github.com/Behat/Behat/tree/2a3832d9cb853a794af3a576f9e524ae460f3340/src/Behat/Behat/Output/ServiceContainer/Formatter>`__,
but in a lot of cases, the simple formatter should work.

> Want to use reviewdog and the custom formatter yourself ?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Want to use reviewdog and the custom formatter yourself?
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you want to use the reviewdog custom formatter, you can find it on github: https://github.com/jdeniau/behat-reviewdog-formatter

> There are other behat custom formatters in the wild, especially `BehatHtmlFormatterPlugin <https://github.com/dutchiexl/BehatHtmlFormatterPlugin>`__,
> that I did not test, but helped me understand how does behat formatter system works, and can output an HTML file that can help you understand why your CI is failing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are other behat custom formatters in the wild, especially `BehatHtmlFormatterPlugin <https://github.com/dutchiexl/BehatHtmlFormatterPlugin>`__.
I did not test that, but it helped me understand how the behat formatter system works, and it can output an HTML file that can help you understand why your CI is failing.
```

Behat has three native formatters:

-  **pretty**: the default formatter, which prints every line in green (if a test passes) or red (if it fails),
-  **progress**: print a "dot" for each test, and a recap of all failing tests at the end,
-  **junit**: outputs a `junit <https://junit.org/>`__ compatible XML file.

Those are nice, and worked for most of the cases. You can use the "progress" one for the CI, and the "pretty" for development for example.

But you might want to handle differently the output that Behat renders.
In this cookbook, we will see how to implement a custom formatter for `reviewdog <https://github.com/reviewdog/reviewdog>`__,
a global review tool that takes input of linters or testers, and that can send "checks" on github, bitbucket or gitlab PR.

Reviewdog can handle `two types of input <https://github.com/reviewdog/reviewdog#input-format>`__:

-  any stdin, coupled with an "errorformat" (a Vim inspired format that can convert text string to machine-readable errors),
-  a `"Reviewdog Diagnostic Format" <https://github.com/reviewdog/reviewdog/tree/48b25a0aafb8494e751387e16f729faee9522c46/proto/rdf>`__: a JSON with error data that reviewdog can parse.

> In my case, I tried parsing Behat's output with errorformat, but I do not know this language, and the multi-line Behat output with "dots" didn't make it easy.

Reviewer 3: I don't think the documentation should by using `I` here. this looks fine for a blog post (where `I` refers to the author of the post), but not so much for documentation.

So I decided to create a custom formatter for Behat.

This way, I will still have Behat's human-readable stdout, and a JSON file written that reviewdog can understand.

Let's dive
----------

Behat allows us to load "extensions", that can add features to the language. In fact, it is a core functionality to implement PHP functions behind gherkin texts.
Those extensions are just classes that are loaded by Behat to register configuration and features.

Behat is powered by Symfony: if you know it, you will already know the concepts under the hood, if you don't, that's not a problem and not required to create your extension.

Anatomy of a formatter extension
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A formatter extension requires three things to work:

-  a class that "defines" the extension, to make your extension work with Behat,
-  a "formatter", that can listen to Behat events, and converts Behat's tests result to anything you want,
-  an "output printer", that writes the converted data anywhere you want (mainly the stdout, a file or a directory).

Create the extension
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Any Behat extensions must implement ``Behat\Testwork\ServiceContainer\Extension``. Under the hood, it implements Symfony ``CompilerPass``.

Reviewer 3: I would remove the mention of CompilerPass here, especially as the extension in this example implements an empty `process` method (which is the only method related to CompilerPass)

It is a way to inject anything you want into Behat's kernel.

In our case, we need to load the "formatter" in Behat's kernel, and tag it as an output formatter.
This way Behat will allow our extension to be configured as a formatter. You can register multiple formatters with the same extension if you like.

.. code:: php

   <?php

   declare(strict_types=1);

>    namespace JDeniau\BehatReviewdogFormatter;

Reviewer 3: I would suggest using a generic namespace instead of your own namespace here, as this is going to be rendered in the official Behat documentation. #146 used `HelloWorld` as namespace

        */
       public function setParameter($name, $value): void
       {
           switch ($name) {
               case 'file_name':
                   if (!is_string($value)) {
                       throw new \InvalidArgumentException('file_name must be a string');
                   }

                   $this->outputPrinter->setFileName($value);
                   break;
               default:
                   throw new \Exception('Unknown parameter ' . $name);
           }
       }

       /**
        * I do not call this, so no need to define an implementation
        */
       public function getParameter($name) { }

       /**
        * Our formatter is a Symfony EventSubscriber.
        * This method tells Behat where we want to "hook" in the process.
        * Here we want to be called:
        *   - at start, when the test is launched with the `BeforeExerciseCompleted::BEFORE` event,
        *   - when a step has ended with the `StepTested::AFTER` event.
        *
        * There are a lot of other events that can be found here in the Behat\Testwork\EventDispatcher\Event class
        */

>        public static function getSubscribedEvents()

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
       public static function getSubscribedEvents(): array
```

This way, this will be compatible with the next major version of Symfony which will make the return type mandatory.

        */
       public function flush(): void
       {
       }

       /**
        * Called by the formatter when test starts
        */
       public function removeOldFile(): void
       {
           $filePath = $this->getFilePath();

           if (file_exists($filePath)) {
               unlink($filePath);
           }
       }

       /**
        * @param array<string> $messages
        */
       private function doWrite(array $messages, bool $append): void
       {
           // create the output path if if does not exists.
           if (!is_dir($this->getOutputPath())) {
               mkdir($this->getOutputPath(), 0777, true);
           }

           // write data to the file
           file_put_contents($this->getFilePath(), implode("\n", $messages) . "\n", $append ? \FILE_APPEND : 0);
       }

       private function getFilePath(): string
       {
           return $this->getOutputPath() . '/' . $this->fileName;
       }
   }

Integration in your project
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You need to add the extension in your Behat configuration file (default is ``behat.yml``) and configure it to use the formatter:

.. code:: yaml

   default:
     extensions:

>        JDeniau\BehatReviewdogFormatter\ReviewdogFormatterExtension: ~

Reviewer 3: if you put your extension class in a `ServiceContainer` subnamespace, with a name matching the last section of your namespace, this unlocks using the shortcut.

Author: Hi,
I do not understand what you mean here: is there a way to "magically" add an extension without being explicit in the configuration file ?

I read https://github.com/Behat/Behat/blob/610fa32937bf52bd79d812103464600ef4649e36/src/Behat/Testwork/ServiceContainer/ContainerLoader.php and https://github.com/Behat/Behat/blob/610fa32937bf52bd79d812103464600ef4649e36/src/Behat/Testwork/ServiceContainer/ExtensionManager.php source code, but I did not see anything about it 🤔

Reviewer 2: You got very close - the magic is [here (and the method it calls)]( https://github.com/Behat/Behat/blob/610fa32937bf52bd79d812103464600ef4649e36/src%2FBehat%2FTestwork%2FServiceContainer%2FExtensionManager.php#L174)

Basically if you define your class named `MyNamespace\MyPackage\ServiceContainer\MyPackageExtension` then in the config file you can just use `MyNamespace\MyPackage` and Behat will find the class.

However I actually think now that we support php config files the short syntax is less useful (people can just add use statements like anywhere else) and we could probably deprecate it at some point.

So I wouldn't worry about it for this PR.

     formatters:
       pretty: true
       reviewdog: # "reviewdog" here is the "name" given in our formatter
         # output_path is optional and handled directly by Behat
         output_path: 'build/logs/behat'
         # file_name is optional and a custom parameter that we inject into the printer
         file_name: 'reviewdog-behat.json'

Different output per profile
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You can activate the extension only when you specify a profile in your command (ex: ``--profile=ci``)

For example if you want the pretty formatter by default, but both progress and reviewdog on your CI, you can configure it like this:

.. code:: yaml

   default:
     extensions:
       JDeniau\BehatReviewdogFormatter\ReviewdogFormatterExtension: ~

     formatters:
       pretty: true

   ci:
     formatters:
       pretty: false
       progress: true
       reviewdog:
         output_path: 'build/logs/behat'
         file_name: 'reviewdog-behat.json'

Enjoy!
-------

That's how you can write a basic custom Behat formatter!

> If you have much more complex logic, and you need the formatter to be more dynamic, Behat do provide a FormatterFactory interface.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you have much more complex logic, and you need the formatter to be more dynamic, Behat provides a FormatterFactory interface.
```

Writing a custom Behat formatter
================================

How to write a custom formatter for Behat?

> Introdution

Reviewer 4: Should be "Introduction"

> Introdution

Author: ```suggestion
Introduction
```

       {
           // create the output path if if does not exists.
           if (!is_dir($this->getOutputPath())) {
               mkdir($this->getOutputPath(), 0777, true);
           }

           // write data to the file
           file_put_contents($this->getFilePath(), implode("\n", $messages) . "\n", $append ? \FILE_APPEND : 0);
       }

       private function getFilePath(): string
       {
           return $this->getOutputPath() . '/' . $this->fileName;
       }
   }

Integration in your project
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You need to add the extension in your Behat configuration file (default is ``behat.yml``)
and configure it to use the formatter:

.. code:: yaml

   default:
     extensions:
       HelloWorld\BehatReviewdogFormatter\ReviewdogFormatterExtension: ~

     formatters:
       pretty: true
       reviewdog: # "reviewdog" here is the "name" given in our formatter
         # output_path is optional and handled directly by Behat
         output_path: 'build/logs/behat'
         # file_name is optional and a custom parameter that we inject into the printer
         file_name: 'reviewdog-behat.json'

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

.. note::

      Remember, this formatter only produces output if scenarios fail - if your features all 
      pass, the output file will not be created.

```
